>> THOMPSON: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 13TH.
SUPREME COURT JUSTICE ANTONIN
SCALIA DEAD AT AGE 79.
TENSIONS BETWEEN WESTERN POWERS
AND RUSSIA INCREASE OVER A
POTENTIAL CEASE-FIRE IN SYRIA.
AND OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT, HOW
THE CITY OF CHICAGO IS FIGHTING
FOOD BORNE ILLNESS USING DATA
ANALYTICS AND TWEETS, NEXT ON
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
MEGAN THOMPSON.
>> Thompson: GOOD EVENING.
THANK YOU FOR JOINING US.
SUPREME COURT JUSTICE ANTONIN
SCALIA HAS DIED.
CHIEF JUSTICE JOHN ROBERTS SAYS
HE IS "SADDENED" TO CONFIRM THE
DEATH ON BEHALF OF THE COURT,
ADDING THAT SCALIA WAS AN
"EXTRAORDINARY INDIVIDUAL AND
JURIST."
EARLIER, THE U.S. MARSHALS
SERVICE CONFIRMED SCALIA'S
DEATH, AND THE GOVERNOR OF TEXAS
PUT OUT A STATEMENT SAYING HE,"
MOURNED" SCALIA'S PASSING.
SCALIA WAS FOUND DEAD THIS
MORNING IN WEST TEXAS, AT A
RESORT RANCH WHERE HE HAD BEEN
ON A HUNTING TRIP SOME THREE-
AND-HALF HOURS FROM EL PASO.
SCALIA WAS THE LONGEST-SERVING
SITTING ASSOCIATE JUSTICE OF THE
SUPREME COURT, ONE OF ITS
LEADING CONSERVATIVE VOICES, AND
ONE OF ITS MOST CONTROVERSIAL.
SCALIA WAS 79 YEARS OLD AND HAD
BEEN A JUSTICE SINCE HIS
APPOINTMENT BY PRESIDENT RONALD
REAGAN IN 1986, ALMOST 30 YEARS
AGO.
JOINING US TONIGHT BY PHONE IS
MARSHA COYLE OF THE NATIONAL LAW
JOURNAL.
MAR SHARKS THANK YOU FOR BEING
HERE.
TELL US, WHY DO YOU THINK
SCALIA'S SINGLE MOST IMPORTANT
CONTRIBUTION TO THE COURT AND
THE LAW HAS BEEN?
>> WELL, I AM TELLING YOU, I
ALE, REALLY BELIEVE THAT JUSTICE
SCALIA WAS A LEADER OF
CONSERVATIVE LEGAL THOUGHT, NOT
JUST ON THE SUPREME COURT, BUT
ALSO OFF THE BENCH.
AND IN PARTICULAR, HE WAS -- HE
REVITALIZED, BROUGHT 0 TO THE
FORE, TO THE PUBLIC AS WELL AS
TO JUDGES AND LAWYERS HIS BELIEF
IN ORIGINALISM AS A WAY OF
INTERPRETING THE CONSTITUTION.
HE LOOKED AT THE CONSTITUTION'S
TEXT AND HE SAW THE MEANING OF
THE CONSTITUTION, NOT IN TERMS
OF THE ORIGINAL INTENT OF THE
FRAMERS, BUT FOR WHAT THE WORDS
MEANT OR WERE UNDERSTOOD TO MEAN
AT THE TIME OF THE WRITING, AND
HE HAS, BY TAKING THAT APPROACH,
HE HAS SENSITIZED ALL OF THE
JUSTICES ON THE BENCH, WHO DO
NOT CALL THEMSELVES ORIGINAL
LIST TO AT LEAST LOOK FIRST AT
THE WORDS OF THE CONSTITUTION
AND WHAT THE MEANING WAS AT THE
TIME THEY WERE WRITTEN, AND I
THINK THAT HAS BEEN A TREMENDOUS
CONTRIBUTION, A THAT HE WILL BE
KNOWN FOR.
>> Thompson: WERE THERE
SPECIFIC AREAS OF THE LAW WHERE
HE WAS MOST INFLUENTIAL OR A
LEADER ON THE COURT?
>> YES.
FIRST OF ALL, HE LED SOMETHING
OF A REVOLUTION ON THE COURT IN
TERMS OF THE MEANING OF THE
SIXTH AMENDMENT, CONFRONTATION
CLAUSE, AND AS YOU KNOW, THAT IS
THE CLAUSE THAT SAYS A CRIMINAL
DEFENDANT HAS THE RIGHT TO
CONFRONT HIS OR HER ACCUSERS,
AND HE BELIEVED THAT THAT --
THAT IS EXACTLY WHAT IT MEANS,
IT MEANS THAT WHOEVER ACTUALLY
TESTS THE DNA HAS TO SHOW UP IN
THE COURTROOM TO TESTIFY TO THE
RESULTS OF THAT DNA TEST.
YOU COULDN'T USE A SURROGATE,
YOU HAD TO HAVE THE RIGHT PERSON
ON THE WITNESS STAND.
HE ALSO REINVIGORATED THE WORLD
OF JURIES AS FACT FINDERS.
THERE WERE TIMES IN CERTAIN
CASES WHERE JUDGES WOULD DECIDE
FACTS, BUT HE SAID THAT HAD
ALWAYS BEEN THE ROLE OF THE JURY
AND FOR A SERIES OF DECISIONS ON
THE COURT MADE THAT CLEAR.
SO I THINK THOSE AREAS, HE WILL
BE KNOWN FOR AS WELL.
IN FACT, HE OFTEN GAVE A JOKE HE
COULD BE A CRIMINAL DEFENDANT'S
BEST FRIEND.
>> AND CAN YOU TELL US, HOW DOES
THE DEATH AFFECT THE CASES THAT
ARE CURRENTLY PENDING?
>> THAT IS A VERY GOOD QUESTION.
AS YOU KNOW, THERE ARE NINE
JUSTICES.
WITH HIS DEATH THERE ARE EIGHT
AND THERE ARE CASES THAT MAY I
SUSPECT HAVE BEEN DECIDED BY A
DIVIDED VOTE IF HE WERE STILL ON
THE BENCH, PERHAPS 5-4, VERY
HIGH PROFILE, HIGH STAKES
CONTROVERSIAL ISSUES BEFORE THE
COURT THIS TERM, LIKE ABORTION,
IMMIGRATION, CASES INVOLVING THE
REDISTRICTING MILLIONS.
WITH HIS DEATH, THERE ARE EIGHT
JUSTICES REMAINING AND WHETHER,
YOU KNOW, HE HAS ACTUALLY --
RULED ON KNOWS CASES ALREADY,
SOME OF THOSE CASES HAVE NOT
EVEN BEEN ARGUED YET, IT SETS UP
A SITUATION WHERE YOU HAVE EIGHT
JUSTICES AND THE POSSIBILITY OF
FOUR-FOUR SPLIT, WHICH MEANS
THAT A REGULAR COURT'S DECISION
STANDS IF THE COURT DIVIDES 4-4.
SO THERE ARE THINGS THAT ARE
GOING TO HAVE TO BE WORKED OUT
AS THE JUSTICES GO FORWARD NOW
WITHOUT JUSTICE SCALIA ON THE
BENCH.
>> GREAT.
AND JUST VERY BRIEFLY NOW, HOW
COULD THIS VACANCY CREATED
AFFECT THE BALANCE OF THE COURT?
>> WELL, THAT IS JUST WHAT I
HINTED AT A LITTLE BIT.
AS I SAID, RIGHT NOW, THE COURT
IS DIVIDED IDEOLOGICALLY 5-4,
YOU HAVE FIVE JUSTICES WHO WHO
ARE APPOINTED BY REPUBLICANS,
PRESIDENTS, YOU HAVE FOUR
JUSTICES APPOINTED BY DEMOCRATIC
PRESIDENTS, WITH JUSTICE
SCALIA'S DEATH, WE NOW HAVE THE
4-4 SPLIT.
THE VACANCY WOULD BE A VERY
CONTROVERSIAL HIGH PROFILE
VACANCY, A LOT DEPENDS ON WHAT
THE SENATE'S WISHES ARE AT THIS
POINT.
WILL PRESIDENT OBAMA TRY TO FILL
THAT VACANCY AS SOON AS
POSSIBLE?
HE WOULD BE FILLING ONE OF THE
CONSERVATIVE SPLITS, WHICH SINCE
HE IS A DEMOCRAT, IF HE WANTED
TO GET THROUGH SOMEONE WHO WAS A
LIBERAL OR MODERATE LIBERAL,
THAT COULD SHIFT THE BALANCE OF
THE COURT.
THERE ARE A LOT OF UNKNOWNS
RIGHT NOW.
WE ARE JUST GOING TO HAVE TO
WAIT AND SEE.
I WOULD ALSO LIKE TO SAY
SOMETHING ABOUT JUSTICE SCALIA
IN GENERAL.
I KNOW THAT MANY OF -- SOMETIMES
STINGING AND PEOPLE WONDERED,
DID THE OTHER JUSTICES TAKE
OFFENSE AT SOME OF THE LANGUAGE
HE USED, AND THE TRUTH IS, HE
WAS WIDELY LIKED ON THE BENCH
AND THEY DID NOT TAKE THOSE
DEFENSES PERSONALLY, HE WAS A
COLORFUL WRITER, AND IN PERSON
AND I DID INTERVIEW HIM SEVERAL
TIMES IN PERSON, HE WAS ALWAYS A
CONSUMMATE GENTLEMAN.
HE WAS -- HE COULD BE VERY
FUNNY, AND SO I THINK HE WANTED
-- HE IS GOING TO BE MISSED VERY
MUCH BY HIS COLLEAGUES ON THE
COURT, ESPECIALLY JUSTICE
GINSBURG WITH WHOM HE HAD A
SPECIAL FRIENDSHIP.
THEY CALLED EACH OTHER THEIR OWN
BEST FRIENDS ON THE SUPREME
COURT, AND DID MANY THINGS
TOGETHER, GOING TO OPERAS, EVEN
VISITED INDIA TOGETHER, WHICH
SHOWS THAT YOU CAN BRIDGE GREAT
DIVIDES WHEN THE DIVIDES ARE
EITHER, POLITICAL, IDEOLOGICAL
OR INTELLECTUAL.
>> Thompson: ALL RIGHT, MARSHA
COYLE, THANKS SO MUCH FOR
JOINING US TONIGHT.
>> MY PLEASURE.
TAKE CARE.
A DAY AFTER AGREEING TO REACH A
CEASE-FIRE IN SYRIA WITHIN A
WEEK, WORLD LEADERS MET TODAY TO
END THE FIVE-YEAR CIVIL WAR THAT
HAS FUELED EUROPE'S MIGRANT
CRISIS AND MAY HAVE COST HALF A
MILLION LIVES.
DIPLOMATS FROM THE UNITED
STATES, RUSSIA, TURKEY, SAUDI
ARABIA, AND IRAN ARE AMONG THOSE
ATTENDING AN ANNUAL SECURITY
CONFERENCE IN MUNICH, GERMANY.
SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN KERRY
CRITICIZED RUSSIA FOR BOMBING
RAIDS DURING THE PAST FOUR
MONTHS BACKING SYRIAN PRESIDENT
BASHAR AL-ASSAD, WHO THE U.S.
WANTS REMOVED FROM POWER.
>> THE VAST MAJORITY, IN OUR
OPINION, OF RUSSIA'S ATTACKS
HAVE BEEN AGAINST LEGITIMATE
OPPOSITION GROUPS.
AND TO ADHERE TO THE AGREEMENT
THAT HAS BEEN MADE, WE THINK IT
IS CRITICAL THAT RUSSIA'S
TARGETING CHANGE.
>> Thompson: RUSSIAN FOREIGN
MINISTER SERGEY LAVROV IS
SKEPTICAL OF A CEASE-FIRE,
SAYING ITS ODDS OF SUCCEEDING
ARE ONLY 49%, WHILE RUSSIAN
PRIME MINISTER DMITRY MEDVEDEV
BLAMED WESTERN SANCTIONS ON
RUSSIA AFTER ITS ANNEXATION OF
CRIMEA, IN UKRAINE, FOR HURTING
RELATIONS.
>> (translated): WE HAVE
FALLEN INTO A NEW COLD WAR.
NEARLY ON A DAILY BASIS, WE ARE
BEING BLAMED FOR THE MOST
TERRIBLE THREAT TO NATO AS A
WHOLE, TO EUROPE, TO AMERICA, TO
OTHER COUNTRIES.
>> Thompson: REBEL-HELD AREAS
AROUND ALEPPO, SYRIA, CONTINUE
TO BE SUBJECT TO FIERCE
FIGHTING, AS GOVERNMENT FORCES
TRY TO RETAKE THE CITY.
AND A NEW REPORT FROM THE
INDEPENDENT SYRIAN CENTER FOR
POLICY RESEARCH ESTIMATES
470,000 SYRIANS HAVE DIED IN THE
WAR, ALMOST DOUBLE PREVIOUS
ESTIMATES."
NEW YORK TIMES" REPORTER DAVID
SANGER IS COVERING THE SYRIA
TALKS, AND HE JOINS ME NOW FROM
MUNICH.
DAVID, A DAY AFTER THE
CEASE-FIRE PLAN WAS ANNOUNCED,
CONFIDENCE IN IT DOESN'T SEEM TO
BE VERY HIGH, CORRECT?
>> IT CERTAINLY DOESN'T.
WE HEARD SERGEY LAVROV, THE
FOREIGN MINISTER OF RUSSIA, SAY
TODAY THAT HE THOUGHT MAYBE 49%.
AND SOMEWHAT SARCASTICALLY WE
HEARD SECRETARY OF STATE KERRY
SAY LATER O, OH, HE'S THAT
OPTIMISTIC?"
I THINK MR. KERRY HAS A HIGHER
SENSE OF PROBABLE THAT THIS WILL
WORK.
BUT THERE'S AN AWFUL LOT, MEGAN,
THAT CAN GET IN THE WAY OF THIS.
THERE ARE TWO PART TO THIS.
THE FIRST PART IS HUMANITARIAN
DELIVERIES TO THE BESEEMED
CITIES IN SYRIA.
I THINK THERE'S A FAIR BIT OF
OPTIMISM THAT THOSE WILL BE
STARK, AND THE QUESTION IS HOW
LONG WILL THEY LAST?
THE SECOND AND MUCH HARDER PART
OF THIS IS WHAT MOST PEOPLE
WOULD CALL A CEASE-FIRE AND WHAT
THEY ARE CALLING FOR THESE
PURPOSES A CESSATION OF
HOSTILITIES.
EVEN SECRETARY KERRY HAS SAID
THIS MAY ONLY BE A PAUSE.
THE IDEA IS GIVE ENOUGH OF A
QUIET MOMENT TO ACTUALLY GET
NEGOTIATIONS GOING.
>> Thompson: IT SEEMS THAT AS
TALK OF THIS CEASE-FIRE HAVE
INCREASED, SO HAVE TENSIONS
BETWEEN THE U.S. AND RUSSIA.
IS THIS JUST POSTURING, OR IS IT
PART OF SOMETHING BIGGER?
>> YOU KNOW, IT REALLY IS
SOMETHING BIGGER.
THINK OF THE DIFFERENT ELEMENTS.
WE HAVE THE CONTINUED TENSIONS
AND SANCTIONS OVER UKRAINE.
WE HAVE THE INCREASED RUSSIAN
PATROLS OFF THE OF THE BRITISH
COAST, OFF MOST OF EUROPE, MORE
NUCLEAR FORCES BEING EXERCISED.
AND I THINK HERE, THE AMERICANS
WERE TAKEN A LITTLE BIT BY
SURPRISE AT THE SPEED AT WHICH
THE RUSSIANS ENDED UP ENTERING
THAT AIR WAR OVER ALEPPO, AND
THUS GAINING SOME LEVERAGE THAT
THE U.S. RIGHT NOW DOES NOT HAVE
IN RETURN.
>> Thompson: ONE OF THE
ISSUES THAT HAS CAUSED TENSION
BETWEEN THE TWO COUNTRIES IS
THIS ISSUE OF MILITARY
COORDINATION IN SYRIA.
CAN YOU TALK A LITTLE BIT ABOUT
THAT AND IF THERE'S BEEN ANY
MOVEMENT ON THAT FRONT.
>> THE UNITED STATES HAS BEEN
VERY, VERY CAUTIOUS ABOUT
GETTING INTO COORDINATION WITH
THE RUSSIANS BECAUSE THEY SAY,
LOOK, THE RUSSIANS ARE DECEIVING
PEOPLE ABOUT WHO THEY'RE
STRIKING.
THEY'RE STRIKING MANY OF THE
REBEL GROUPS ALIGNED WITH THE
UNITED STATES OTHER ANDS WHO
HAVE BEEN OPPOSING ASSAD, AND
SAYING THAT THEY'RE JUST
STRIKING THE TWO TERROR GROUPS
THAT HAVE BEEN DESIGNATED BY THE
UNITED NATIONS, THE ISLAMIC
STATE, AND THE AL-NUSRA FRONT.
BUT THE COORDINATION IS GOING TO
BE UNAVOIDABLE OVER THE NEXT FEW
WEEKS BECAUSE THEY'RE SUPPOSED
TO WORK TOGETHER IN A JOINT TASK
FORCE HEADED BY MR. KERRY AND
MR. LAVROV, TO PICK OUT
TARGETING.
THEY'RE SUPPOSED TO WORK
TOGETHER ON THE CEASE-FIRE, AND
TOGETHER ON THE HUMANITARIAN
AID.
I DON'T KNOW HOW YOU DO THAT
WITHOUT SOMETHING THAT
APPROACHES COORDINATION, MADE
ALL THE HARDER BY THE FACT THAT
THE UNITED STATES, OF COURSE,
BACK INTO THE SANCTIONS BUSINESS
AGAINST THE RUSSIANS RIGHT NOW.
>> Thompson: DAVID, YOU CAN
TALK A LITTLE BIT ABOUT THE
TIMETABLE, HOW THIS WILL ALL
WORK ON THE GROUND.
>> WELL, MEGAN, THE WAY IT'S
SUPPOSED TO WORK IS THAT THE
HUMANITARIAN RELIEF IS SUPPOSED
TO BEGIN WITHIN DAYS, AND
SECRETARY KERRY SAID TODAY THAT
THE TRUCKS ARE LOADED UP AND
READY TO GO.
BUT THAT'S A DIFFERENT THING
THAN ACTUALLY GETTING THEM INTO
WHERE THEY'RE SUPPOSED TO BE.
AND THE RUSSIANS ARE SUPPOSED TO
BE AIRDROPPING SOME AID.
SOME OF THE BIG QUESTIONS IS
WHERE THEY AIRED DROP IT AND TO
WHICH PEOPLE?
IF A WEEK FROM TODAY WE STILL
SEE A LOT OF FIGHTING GOING ON,
THEN YOU'LL KNOW THAT THIS
WASN'T WORK THE WAY IT WAS
SUPPOSED TO.
>> Thompson: ALL RIGHT, DAVID
SANGER OF THE "NEW YORK TIMES."
THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR JOINING
US.
>> THANK YOU, MEGAN.
GOOD TO BE BACK WITH YOU.
>> Thompson: AN ISLAMIC MILITANT
GROUP LINKED TO AL QAEDA IS
CLAIMING RESPONSIBILITY FOR A
BUNGLED ATTEMPT TO BLOW UP A
PASSENGER JET OVER SOMALIA
EARLIER THIS MONTH.
AL-SHABAB SAYS THE ATTACK WAS
INTENDED AS RETRIBUTION FOR WHAT
IT CALLS CRIMES COMMITTED BY THE
WEST AGAINST THE MUSLIMS OF
SOMALIA.
A SUICIDE BOMBER BLEW A HOLE IN
THE FUSELAGE OF A SOMALI-OWNED
DAALLO AIRLINES JET, SHORTLY
AFTER IT TOOK OFF FROM MOGADISHU
ON FEBRUARY 2.
THE PLANE HAD BEEN EN ROUTE TO
THE AFRICAN NATION OF DJIBOUTI
WITH 73 OTHER PASSENGERS ON
BOARD.
NONE OF THE OTHER PASSENGERS
WERE KILLED, BUT THE BOMBER WAS
SUCKED OUT OF THE PLANE TO HIS
DEATH.
THE PLANE MADE A SUCCESSFUL
EMERGENCY LANDING IN MOGADISHU.
POPE FRANCIS IS IN MEXICO FOR A
FIVE-DAY VISIT, HIS FIRST AS
PONTIFF TO THE OVERWHELMINGLY
CATHOLIC COUNTRY.
THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE LINED THE
POPE'S ROUTE TO THE NATIONAL
PALACE, WHERE HE MET WITH
MEXICAN PRESIDENT ENRIQUE PENA
NIETO TODAY.
IN HIS PUBLIC REMARKS, FRANCIS
SAID MEXICAN LEADERS HAVE A"
DUTY" TO FIGHT CORRUPTION AND
DRUG TRAFFICKING, AND WORK FOR
THE "COLLECTIVE GOOD."
THE POPE URGED THE COUNTRY'S
BISHOPS AND ARCHBISHOPS TO DO
MORE TO HELP MIGRANTS, AND THEN
CELEBRATED MASS AT MEXICO CITY'S
MASSIVE BASILICA OF THE VIRGIN
OF GUADALUPE, WITH HUNDREDS OF
THOUSANDS WATCHING ON SCREENS
SET UP OUTSIDE.
MORE THAN 80% OF MEXICO'S 121-
MILLION PEOPLE ARE ROMAN
CATHOLIC, MAKING IT THE SECOND
MOST POPULOUS CATHOLIC COUNTRY
IN THE WORLD AFTER BRAZIL.
FOR LIVE COVERAGE OF TONIGHT'S
REPUBLICAN PRESIDENTIAL DEBATE
IN SOUTH CAROLINA, GO ONLINE.
VISIT pbs.org/newshour AND
FOLLOW US ON TWITTER AT
NEWSHOUR.
>> Thompson: CHIPOTLE, THE
MEXICAN GRILL CHAIN, CLOSED ITS
2,000 RESTAURANTS FOR FOUR HOURS
ON MONDAY FOR A NATIONAL STAFF
VIDEO CONFERENCE ON FOOD SAFETY.
THIS AFTER NEARLY 500 CHIPOTLE
CUSTOMERS GOT SICK LAST YEAR
AFTER EATING FOOD CONTAMINATED
WITH E-COLI OR SALMONELLA.
REGULAR INSPECTIONS HELP KEEP
RESTAURANTS CLEAN AND SAFE, BUT
ACROSS THE COUNTRY, THAT JOB
FALLS LARGELY TO LOCAL PUBLIC
HEALTH DEPARTMENTS, MANY OF
WHICH HAVE LIMITED RESOURCES.
IN CHICAGO, FOOD INSPECTORS ARE
IMPROVING THEIR EFFICIENCY BY
ANALYZING DATA AND COMMUNICATING
WITH THE PUBLIC ON SOCIAL MEDIA.
LAST WEEK, I TRAVELED TO CHICAGO
TO SEE HOW IT'S BEING DONE.
THAT'S TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE
SEGMENT, AND IT'S PART OF OUR
SERIES ON CITIES ADOPTING
INNOVATIVE WAYS TO SOLVE
PROBLEMS CALLED "URBAN IDEAS."
>> Reporter: MARK CHMIELEWSKI IS
THE EXECUTIVE CHEF AT
LATINICITY, A HIP NEW EATERY IN
DOWNTOWN CHICAGO.
AT THIS SIT-DOWN RESTAURANT,
BAR, AND AT 10 FOOD COUNTERS,
CUSTOMERS CAN WATCH THEIR SUSHI
BEING ROLLED, BURGERS FLIPPED,
AND BURRITOS WRAPPED.
BUT WHAT THEY DON'T SEE ARE THE
STEPS BEHIND THE SCENES THAT
ENSURE THE SAFETY OF THEIR FOOD.
>> ALL STATIONS HAVE HAND SINKS.
PROBABLY THE MOST BIGGEST THING
IS WASHING YOUR HANDS.
ALL THE FISH GETS ICED DOWN.
>> Reporter: CHMIELEWSKI
OVERSEES SYSTEMS AND PROCEDURES
TO ENSURE THAT ALL THE FOOD
SERVED HERE IS FRESH.
>> EVERYTHING UP OFF THE GROUND.
UP OFF THE FLOOR.
>> Reporter: TEMPERATURE IS KEY.
THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
AGRICULTURE RECOMMENDS HOT FOOD
IS SERVED AT AT LEAST 140
DEGREES.
COLD FOOD MUST BE REFRIGERATED
40 DEGREES AND BELOW.
AND DIRTY DISHES MUST BE WASHED
IN HOT WATER CLOSE TO BOILING.
>> IT'S PARAMOUNT, TO HAVE, YOU
KNOW, GREAT FOOD SAFETY WITH A
LOT OF DIFFERENT SYSTEMS IN
PLACE TO PREVENT THE PUBLIC AND
YOUR STAFF FROM BECOMING SICK
FROM FOODBORNE ILLNESS.
THAT CAN BE DEVASTATING.
IT CAN SHUT YOU DOWN.
FAST.
>> Reporter: ACCORDING TO THE
CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND
PREVENTION, EVERY YEAR ABOUT 48
MILLION PEOPLE IN THE U.S. GET
SICK FROM FOODBORNE ILLNESS,
FROM ALL SOURCES OF CONTAMINATED
FOOD.
128,000 ARE HOSPITALIZED, AND
3,000 DIE.
>> I THINK FOOD SAFETY IS ONE OF
THE CORE PUBLIC HEALTH ISSUES
THAT WE FACE.
>> Reporter: JULIE MORITA IS A
DOCTOR AND CHICAGO'S
COMMISSIONER OF PUBLIC HEALTH.
HER DEPARTMENT IS IN CHARGE OF
INSPECTING ALL 16,500
ESTABLISHMENTS THAT SERVE FOOD
IN CHICAGO.
CLOSE TO 7,000 ARE CLASSIFIED
"HIGH RISK"- THOSE WHERE CHEFS
HANDLE RAW INGREDIENTS AND ARE
THUS MORE AT RISK OF FOODBORNE
ILLNESS OUTBREAKS.
>> IF WE DON'T ADDRESS AND MAKE
SURE THAT OUR FOOD IS SAFE, WE
WILL BE CONSTANTLY BE DEALING
WITH OUTBREAKS AND CHALLENGES
RELATED TO THAT, AND SO IT'S
REALLY IN OUR BEST INTEREST TO
INSURE THE SAFETY OF FOOD SO
THAT WE CAN DO AND FOCUS ON
OTHER AREAS THAT ARE IMPORTANT
TO PUBLIC HEALTH AS WELL.
>> Reporter: I FOLLOWED ONE FOOD
INSPECTOR, ANNETTE GRIMES, AS
SHE MADE AN UNANNOUNCED VISIT TO
A RESTAURANT ON CHICAGO'S SOUTH
SIDE.
>> DID YOU VACUUM PACK THIS, AND
WHERE'S THE MACHINE?
BECAUSE YOU'RE NOT ALLOWED TO
VACUUM PACK.
>> Reporter: RECORDS FOR ALL
SHELLFISH MUST BE KEPT.
>> HOW ABOUT TAGS FOR THE
OYSTERS?
>> Reporter: SHE EVEN PROBES FOR
CLUTTER IN THE BASEMENT.
THE STATE REQUIRES CHICAGO TO
INSPECT HIGH-RISK VENUES LIKE
THIS RESTAURANT AT LEAST ONCE A
YEAR.
BUT CHICAGO HAS HAD A DIFFICULT
TIME KEEPING UP.
A 2012 REVIEW BY THE STATE FOUND
THE CITY TO BE OUT OF COMPLIANCE
WITH STATE INSPECTION
REQUIREMENTS.
ACCORDING TO MORITA, THEY'RE
WORKING TO GET BACK ON TRACK.
>> THE CITY HAS TAKEN THIS VERY
SERIOUSLY, AND SO WE'VE DONE
SOME VERY CREATIVE AND
INNOVATIVE THINGS RECENTLY.
>> Reporter: THE PUBLIC HEALTH
DEPARTMENT HIRED MORE
INSPECTORS.
TODAY THERE ARE 35.
BUT THAT'S STILL ONLY ONE
INSPECTOR FOR NEARLY EVERY 200
HIGH-RISK RESTAURANTS.
SO THE CITY TURNED TO DATA
ANALYTICS.
TOM SCHENK LEADS A TEAM OF
CODERS AND DATA SCIENTISTS WHO
CREATED AN ALGORITHM TO PREDICT
WHICH RESTAURANTS ARE MORE
LIKELY TO HAVE THE MOST SERIOUS
TYPES OF VIOLATIONS.
>> THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
ANALYTICS TO COME IN AND SAY,
CAN WE DO THIS A LITTLE BIT
BETTER?
>> Reporter: THIS IS HOW IT
WORKS.
THE PROGRAM CRUNCHES 12
VARIABLES BASED ON PUBLICLY-
AVAILABLE INFORMATION.
THINGS THAT SEEM OBVIOUS, LIKE A
RESTAURANT'S PREVIOUS
VIOLATIONS, THE LENGTH OF TIME
SINCE THE LAST INSPECTION, HOW
LONG IT'S BEEN OPERATING, OR
NEARBY GARBAGE COMPLAINTS.
AND, THE NOT-SO-OBVIOUS, LIKE
THE THREE-DAY AVERAGE HIGH
TEMPERATURE, NEARBY BURGLARIES,
AND WHETHER THE PLACE IS
LICENSED TO SELL TOBACCO.
SMOKING IS NOT ALLOWED IN
RESTAURANTS.
>> WHAT WE FOUND IS PLACES WITH
TOBACCO LICENSE WERE LESS LIKELY
TO HAVE THESE SANITATION
VIOLATIONS, WHICH ESSENTIALLY
PROBABLY MEANS THAT THEY'RE
MAINTAINING THOSE HIGH LEVELS TO
MAKE SURE THAT THEY PROTECT
THESE LICENSES THAT ARE ALSO
VERY VALUABLE TO THEM.
>> Reporter: THE NUMBER OF
BURGLARIES IN AN AREA, WHAT DOES
THAT HAVE TO DO WITH FOOD
SAFETY?
>> WHAT WE FOUND WAS AREAS THAT
HAVE PROPERTY CRIME AROUND IT,
WERE MORE LIKELY TO HAVE
SANITATION VIOLATIONS.
>> Reporter: EXPLAIN TO ME HOW
THE WEATHER HAS ANYTHING TO DO
WITH WHETHER OR NOT A RESTAURANT
MIGHT VIOLATE A FOOD SAFETY
REGULATION?
>> ONE OF THINGS THAT MATTERS
THE MOST AROUND HAVING FOOD
VIOLATIONS IS WHETHER OR NOT
YOU'RE ABLE TO MAINTAIN THE
TEMPERATURE OF YOUR FOOD.
AND SO WHEN THE TEMPERATURE GOES
UP, SOMETIMES IT'S HARDER TO
KEEP THOSE THINGS CHILLED OR
COOLED.
AND WHAT THIS ALGORITHM
ESSENTIALLY DOES, IS IT TAKES
THIS DATA, THESE DIFFERENT
OBSERVATIONS THAT WE HAVE, AND
ESSENTIALLY WEIGHTS THEM IN
TERMS OF IMPORTANT AND HOW MUCH
PREDICT WHETHER OR NOT THERE'S A
CRITICAL VIOLATION AT A
RESTAURANT.
>> Reporter: SCHENK'S TEAM
TESTED THEIR PROGRAM IN 2014 AND
DISCOVERED THE RATE OF FINDING
VIOLATIONS INCREASED BY 25%.
THAT MEANT, INSPECTORS FOUND
VIOLATIONS ABOUT SEVEN DAYS
EARLIER THAN BEFORE-- A WEEK
LESS OF POTENTIAL EXPOSURE FOR
CUSTOMERS BASED ON THE
ALGORITHM, CHICAGO'S DIRECTOR OF
FOOD PROTECTION GERRIN CHEEK
BUTLER ASSIGNS THE INSPECTORS,
ALSO CALLED SANITARIANS, TO
RESTAURANTS THEY MUST VISIT.
>> THE HIGHER THE COEFFICIENT
THE MORE LIKELY THERE ARE TO BE
CRITICAL AND SERIOUS VIOLATIONS
FOUND AT THE INSPECTION.
SO THESE ARE THE ONES THAT WE
WOULD ASSIGN FOR INSPECTION
FIRST.
IT UPDATES CONTINUOUSLY, SO IT'S
ALWAYS UPDATING.
SO THIS HAS DEFINITELY HELPED US
PRIORITIZE OUR INSPECTIONS, PUT
OUR SANITARIANS WHERE THEY NEED
TO BE.
AND SO WHAT WE HAVE FOUND IS
THAT IN THE BEGINNING OF THE
YEAR, WE ARE FINDING THAT WE
HAVE MORE CRITICAL AND SERIOUS
VIOLATIONS IN THE FIRST QUARTER.
>> Reporter: THAT ALLOWS
RESTAURANTS TO CORRECT PROBLEMS
EARLY IN THE YEAR.
>> THIS IS YOUR INSPECTION
REPORT.
>> Reporter: PLACES LIKE THE
RESTAURANT ON THE SOUTH SIDE,
WHICH FAILED ITS RANDOM
INSPECTION.
INSPECTOR ANNETTE GRIMES FOUND
VIOLATIONS WITH THE DISHWASHER.
>> WE NEED TO GO TO THE THREE
COMPARTMENT SINK TO WASH, RINSE
AND SANITIZE.
YOU CAN'T USE THIS UNTIL WE GET
IT FIXED.
>> Reporter: AND TEMPERATURES OF
SOME FOODS.
>> IT'S ONLY 118.
>> Reporter: THE OWNERS WERE
FINED.
>> IT HAS TO BE 140 OR ABOVE.
SO ALL OF THAT HAS BEEN
DISCARDED AND YOU'RE BEING
ISSUED A CRITICAL CITATION FOR
HAVING THOSE PRODUCTS.
>> Reporter: THE MANAGERS HAVE
ONE WEEK TO MAKE NECESSARY
CHANGES OR FACE THE POSSIBILITY
OF MORE FINES AND INSPECTIONS.
>> WE'LL MAKE SURE EVERYTHING IS
TAKEN CARE OF AS SOON AS
POSSIBLE.
>> Reporter: CHICAGO RESTAURANTS
ARE REQUIRED TO POST THEIR
INSPECTION REPORT SOMEWHERE
PUBLICLY, BUT IT'S NOT LIKE NEW
YORK AND LOS ANGELES, WHERE
RESTAURANTS GET LETTER GRADES
THAT ARE POSTED RIGHT IN THE
FRONT WINDOW.
CHICAGO DOES MAKE THE INSPECTION
RESULTS PUBLIC ONLINE, POSTING
THEM ON THE WEB IN A DATABASE
SEARCHABLE BY RESTAURANT NAME.
IN ADDITION, THE CITY HAS
LAUNCHED THE APP OPEN GRID WHERE
RESIDENTS CAN FIND PUBLIC
INFORMATION INCLUDING RESTAURANT
INSPECTION RESULTS.
CHICAGO IS SHARING THE CODE
BEHIND ITS ALGORITHM SO OTHER
MUNICIPALITIES CAN USE IT.
MONTGOMERY COUNTY, MARYLAND, WAS
THE FIRST TO TRY IT OUT.
IN A TEST, IT FOUND VIOLATIONS
THREE DAYS EARLIER THAN BEFORE.
BESIDES THE ALGORITHM, THE
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH ALSO
RESPONDS TO COMPLAINTS ABOUT
RESTAURANTS.
MOST COME THROUGH THE CITY'S 311
SYSTEM, OR TWITTER.
A PROGRAM CALLED FOODBORNE
CHICAGO MINES TWITTER FOR
MESSAGES ABOUT FOOD POISONING,
AND OFTEN RESPONDS.
>> SO SHE'S SAYING, "FOOD
POISONING IS NOT MY FAVORITE."
AND THEN WE RESPONDED FROM
FOODBORNE CHICAGO AND WE SAY--
"SORRY TO HEAR THAT YOU WERE
ILL.
THE CHICAGO HEALTH DEPARTMENT
CAN HELP."
AND THEN WE GIVE THEM THE LINK.
>> Reporter: THE LINK IS TO AN
ONLINE FORM THAT ASKS USERS FOR
MORE INFORMATION ABOUT WHAT
HAPPENED.
IF THE TWEET CHECKS OUT, THE
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SENDS AN
INSPECTOR.
OF THE NEARLY 4,000 TWEETS
REVIEWED IN THE LAST FEW YEARS,
ABOUT 600 GENERATED AN
INSPECTION.
AT LATINICITY, WHICH PASSED ITS
LAST INSPECTION WITH ONLY A FEW
MINOR THINGS TO FIX LIKE A LEAKY
SINK, EXECUTIVE CHEF MARK
CHMIELEWSKI WELCOMES CHICAGO'S
USE OF THE NEW ALGORITHM.
BUT HE HOPES RESTAURANT GOERS
CHECK THE CITY'S INSPECTION
REPORTS RATHER THAN BELIEVING
UNVERIFIED COMPLAINTS ON SOCIAL
MEDIA.
>> THAT'S A SLIPPERY SLOPE.
TWITTER AND SOCIAL MEDIA, THEY
WIELD A VERY MIGHTY SWORD.
AND IF SOMEONE, THEY JUST-- "I
HAD BAD SUSHI AT, YOU KNOW, ABC
PLACE."
IS IT REALLY FROM THERE, OR WAS
IT FROM SOMETHING THAT THEY HAD
FOR BREAKFAST.
THEY COULD DO A LOT OF DAMAGE TO
SOMEBODY IF IT'S INCORRECT.
>> Reporter: AS FOR THE
RESTAURANT ON THE SOUTH SIDE,
DURING THE FOLLOW-UP INSPECTION
THIS PAST WEEK, INSPECTOR
ANNETTE GRIMES FOUND ALL
VIOLATIONS CORRECTED, AND THE
RESTAURANT PASSED.
>> FOR MORE ON THE SUPREME
COURT JUSTICE ANTONIN SCALIA,
VISIT pbs.org/newshour, THAT'S
ALL FOR THIS
NEWSHOUR, GOOD NIGHT.